---
layout: post
title:  "Building a web app in Python using Flask with SQLAlchemy ORM"
date:   2020-05-24 19:26:00 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

I recently experimented  with the Flask framework in Python and I ended up building a fully functional web app and deployed it to a linux server using Linode. This is summary of some of the design aspects, the full code can be found in this [repository](https://github.com/adamobaid/Flask-app)

**Overview**

I began writing the app in modules scattered here and there, but then I re-structured it into a package where I separated the data structure models, templates, routes and views. I integrated several features such that users of my blog can login, logout, create posts, update their profile information and reset their passwords.


- I created several routes like for users to write new posts `@app.route("/post/new")`
- I created templates for each route & extended their style from the layout file I created
- I designed the database models for posts and users and used `SQLALCHemy` extension 
- I implemented forms so that users can submit login, logout and registration requests
- I added user Authentication functionality such as hashing user's passwords with `Bcrypt`
- I generated secure time sensitive tokens so that only allowed user can reset password
- I implemented email reset functionality for users using `Dangerous`
- I added custom pagination queries so that only a certain number of queries show on a given page
- I created a virtual Ubuntu environmnet on a linux server (using https://cloud.linode.com/)


#### Database Design:
---------------
In order to store the Posts and User information data for the blog, I needed to setup a database and integrate it with the app. This will allow users to create posts, update thier account information, and most importantly register and create accounts. 

####  Models / SQLALCHemy

I created a class called User and a class called Post. Both classes inherit from db.Model. Within these lasses I defined the columns needed for the blog users and posts. This is done by specifying several parameters to the Column() inherited from db.Model. For example, for the id column, I defined it as intger type and as the primary key of the table. For the username column, I defined it to be a string and added a condition that it must be unique (two users can't have the same username). 

    class User(db.Model, UserMixin):
    id = db.Column(db.Integer, primary_key=True)
    username = db.Column(db.String(20), unique=True, nullable=False)
    email = db.Column(db.String(120), unique=True, nullable=False)
    image_file = db.Column(db.String(20), nullable=False, default='default.jpg')
    password = db.Column(db.String(60), nullable=False)
   
I did the same to create a table that stores the posts created by each user. Notice that both tables have the `id` column as primary key. The post table will have a title, date_posted, content and 

    class Post(db.Model):
    id = db.Column(db.Integer, primary_key=True)
    title = db.Column(db.String(100), nullable=False)
    date_posted = db.Column(db.DateTime, nullable=False, default=datetime.utcnow)
    content = db.Column(db.Text, nullable=False)
 
Because of the fact that users will write posts, there will be a relationship between the two tables (1 to many relationship), as one user is allowed to publish multiple posts. To account for that, I created a `posts` attribute which contains a relationship with the `Post` table. In SQLALCHemy we can specify a `backref` which allows us to access posts created by the user. 


 To do this, in the Post Model I added:
 
    posts = db.relationship('Post', backref='author', lazy=True)
    
  And in the User model I added:
     
    user_id = db.Column(db.Integer, db.ForeignKey('user.id'), nullable=False)

Note that `posts` in the User model is not a column, it is just running a query on the table in the background that grabs any posts from a given user. 

**Querying the database using SQLite**
  
Navigate to the app folder using the `Terminal` on Mac or `cmd` in Windows and invoke the Python interpreter. The database instance model can be imported and queried as follows:

    # Navigate to the app directory `/flask_app/
    >>>from flaskblog.models import db
    # create the database instance
    >>>db.create_all()
    # import Post and User Model
    >>>from flasblog.models import Post, User

    
**Adding data to the tables**

    user_1 = User(username='Adam', email='adamobaid@outlook.com', password='password')
    post_1 = Post(title = 'First_Post', content='Hello World!', user_id=user_1.id)

A unique id and default picture will be assigned to user_1 as per the design of the User model. Also note the the password is hashed in final app. Now to add the user and post:

    db.session.add(use_1)
    db.session.add(post_1)
    db.session.commit()
    
Now I can query the database the with following commands:

    # Return all users or .first() for first user
    User.query.all()
    >>> [User('Adam', 'adamobaid@outlook.com', 'default.jpg')]
    # filter the users by specifying a username
    User.query.filter_by(username='Adam').all()
    >>> [User('Adam', 'adamobaid@outlook.com', 'default.jpg')]

**I added more posts and users to demonstrate more queries:**

To iterate over the user's posts

    for user in user.posts:
        print(post.title)

    >>> First_Post
    >>> Seond_Post
    >>> Third_Post
    
**Querying the Post table directly:**

    post = Post.query.first()
    post
    >>>[User('Adam', 'adamobaid@outlook.com', 'default.jpg')]
    # get the id of the user who created the post
    post.user_id
    1
    # using backref in User table / posts relationship:
    posts.author
    User('Adam', 'adamobaid@outlook.com', 'default.jpg')


**Adding pagination queries**

In blog app I will be querying the posts made by the users to display them in different pages, but with the possibility of so many posts, a page will be slow to load and will look crowded. To avoid this, I added custom SQL pagination queries to keep the number of posts per page to a specific number. So for example instead of sorting posts from newest to oldest like `post.date_posted`, I loaded certain number of posts in one page, and showed numbers for next pages at the bottom. A useful function provided by SQLALChemy is `query.paginate()` which is similar to `query.all() but it takes certain parameters. 


invoking `posts = Post.query.paginate()` returns a pagination object. We can explore the methods associated that object to see what we can do with it:

    >>> posts = Post.query.paginate()
    >>> dir(posts)
    ['__class__', '__delattr__', '__dict__', '__dir__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__format__', '__ge__', '__getattribute__', '__gt__', '__hash__', '__init__', '__init_subclass__', '__le__', '__lt__', '__module__', '__ne__', '__new__', '__reduce__', '__reduce_ex__', '__repr__', '__setattr__', '__sizeof__', '__str__', '__subclasshook__', '__weakref__', 'has_next', 'has_prev', 'items', 'iter_pages', 'next', 'next_num', 'page', 'pages', 'per_page', 'prev', 'prev_num', 'query', 'total']

I already demonstrated some of them like `query`. I also see attributes like : `items`, `iter_pages`, `next`, `page`, `per_page`. These are very useful for the pagination task as we can use them to specify certain number of posts per pages. 
    
    # default per_page is 20 posts per page
    >>> posts.per_page
    20
    # current page I'm at
    >>> posts.page
    1
    # using the page attribute I switch to the second page (essentially a row)
    >>> posts = Post.query.paginate(page=2)
    # loop over the posts in that page
    >>> for post in posts.items:
    ...     print(post)
    ... 
    Post('Frst Post', '2018-05-02 22:49:01.367786')
    Post('Second Post', '2018-05-02 22:49:01.367868')
    Post('Third Post', '2018-05-02 22:49:01.367958')
    >>> 
    # I see we have 3 posts in the second page. 
    # Using per_page attribute to get 5 posts per page
    posts = Post.query.paginate(per_page=5)

## Deploying the App to a Linux server 
will be documented soon. 


# References
- [Python 3.8 Documentations](https://docs.python.org/3/)
- [Flask Documentations](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/)
- [SQLAlchemy ORM](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/13/)
- [C. Schafer - Flask Tutorial Series](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwZwr5Tvyxo)

